# Solidity Tutorials

Solidity is a high-level language whose syntax is similar to that of
JavaScript and it is designed to compile to code for the Ethereum Virtual
Machine. This tutorial provides a basic introduction to Solidity and assumes
some knowledge of the Ethereum Virtual Machine and programming in general. For
more details, please see the Solidity specficiation (yet to be written). This
tutorial does not cover features like the natural language documentation or
formal verification and is also not meant as a final specification of the
language.

You can start using [Solidity in your browser](http://chriseth.github.io/cpp-ethereum), with no need to download or compile anything. This application only
supports compilation - if you want to run the code or inject it into the
blockchain, you have to use a client like AlethZero.

## Simple Example

    
    
    contract SimpleStorage { uint storedData; function set(uint x) { storedData = x; } function get() constant returns (uint retVal) { return storedData; }
    }
    

`uint storedData` declares a state variable called `storedData` of type `uint`
(unsigned integer of 256 bits) whose position in storage is automatically
allocated by the compiler. The functions `set` and `get` can be used to modify
or retrieve the value of the variable.

    
    
    contract Coin { address minter; mapping (address => uint) balances; function Coin() { minter = msg.sender; } function mint(address owner, uint amount) { if (msg.sender != minter) return; balances[owner] += amount; } function send(address receiver, uint amount) { if (balances[msg.sender] < amount) return; balances[msg.sender] -= amount; balances[receiver] += amount; } function queryBalance(address addr) constant returns (uint balance) { return balances[addr]; }
    }
    

This contract introduces some new concepts. One of them is the `address` type,
which is a 160 bit value that does not allow any arithmetic operations.
Furthermore, the state variable `balance` is of a complex datatype that maps
addresses to unsigned integers. Mappings can be seen as hashtables which are
virtually initialized such that every possible key exists and is mapped to a
value whose byte-representation is all zeros. The special function `Coin` is
the constructor which is run during creation of the contract and cannot be
called afterwards. It permanently stores the address of the person creating
the contract: Together with `tx` and `block`, `msg` is a magic global variable
that contains some properties which allow access to the world outside of the
contract. The function `queryBalance` is declared `constant` and thus is not
allowed to modify the state of the contract (note that this is not yet
enforced, though). In Solidity, return "parameters" are named and essentially
create a local variable. So to return the balance, we could also just use
`balance = balances[addr];` without any return statement.

Single-line comments (`//`) and multi-line comments (`/*...*/`) are possible,
while triple-slash comments (`///`) right in front of function declarations
introduce NatSpec comments (which are not covered here).

## Types

The currently implemented (elementary) types are booleans (`bool`), integer
and fixed-length string/byte array (bytes0 to bytes32) types. The integer
types are signed and unsigned integers of various bit widths (`int8`/`uint8`
to `int256`/`uint256` in steps of 8 bits, where `uint`/`int` are aliases for
`uint256`/`int256`) and addresses (of 160 bits).

Comparisons (`<=`, `!=`, `==`, etc.) always yield booleans which can be
combined using `&&`, `||` and `!`. Note that the usual short-circuiting rules
apply for `&&` and `||`, which means that for expressions of the form `(0 < 1
|| fun())`, the function is actually never called.

If an operator is applied to different types, the compiler tries to implicitly
convert one of the operands to the type of the other (the same is true for
assignments). In general, an implicit conversion is possible if it makes sense
semantically and no information is lost: `uint8` is convertible to `uint16`
and `int120` to `int256`, but `int8` is not convertible to `uint256`.
Furthermore, unsigned integers can be converted to bytes of the same or larger
size, but not vice-versa. Any type that can be converted to `uint160` can also
be converted to `address`.

If the compiler does not allow implicit conversion but you know what you are
doing, an explicit type conversion is sometimes possible:

    
    
    int8 y = -3;
    uint x = uint(y);
    

At the end of this code snippet, `x` will have the value `0xfffff..fd` (64 hex
characters), which is -3 in two's complement representation of 256 bits.

For convenience, it is not always necessary to explicitly specify the type of
a variable, the compiler automatically infers it from the type of the first
expression that is assigned to the variable:

    
    
    uint20 x = 0x123;
    var y = x;
    

Here, the type of `y` will be `uint20`. Using `var` is not possible for
function parameters or return parameters. State variables of integer and
bytesXX types can be declared as constant.

    
    
    uint constant x = 32;
    bytes3 constant text = "abc";
    

## Integer Literals

The type of integer literals is not determined as long as integer literals are
combined with themselves. This is probably best explained with examples:

    
    
    var x = 1 - 2;
    

The value of `1 - 2` is `-1`, which is assigned to `x` and thus `x` receives
the type `int8` \-- the smallest type that contains `-1`. The following code
snippet behaves differently, though:

    
    
    var one = 1;
    var two = 2;
    var x = one - two;
    

Here, `one` and `two` both have type `uint8` which is also propagated to `x`.
The subtraction inside the type `uint8` causes wrapping and thus the value of
`x` will be `255`.

It is even possible to temporarily exceed the maximum of 256 bits as long as
only integer literals are used for the computation:

    
    
    var x = (0xffffffffffffffffffff * 0xffffffffffffffffffff) * 0;
    

Here, `x` will have the value `0` and thus the type `uint8`.

## Ether and Time Units

A literal number can take a suffix of `wei`, `finney`, `szabo` or `ether` to
convert between the subdenominations of ether, where Ether currency numbers
without a postfix are assumed to be "wei", e.g. `2 ether == 2000 finney`
evaluates to `true`.

Furthermore, suffixes of `seconds`, `minutes`, `hours`, `days`, `weeks` and
`years` can be used to convert between units of time where seconds are the
base unit and units are converted naively (i.e. a year is always exactly 365
days, etc.).

## Control Structures

Most of the control structures from C/JavaScript are available in Solidity
except for `switch` (not planned) and `goto` (note that it's called Solidity).
So there is: `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, `break`, `continue`, `return`. Note
that there is no type conversion from non-boolean to boolean types as there is
in C and JavaScript, so `if (1) { ... }` is _not_ valid Solidity.

## Function Calls

Functions of the current contract can be called directly, also recursively, as
seen in this nonsensical example:

    
    
    contract c { function g(uint a) returns (uint ret) { return f(); } function f() returns (uint ret) { return g(7) + f(); }
    }
    

The expression `this.g(8);` is also a valid function call, but this time, the
function will be called via a message call and not directly via jumps. When
calling functions of other contracts, the amount of Wei sent with the call and
the gas can be specified:

    
    
    contract InfoFeed { function info() returns (uint ret) { return 42; }
    }
    contract Consumer { InfoFeed feed; function setFeed(address addr) { feed = InfoFeed(addr); } function callFeed() { feed.info.value(10).gas(800)(); }
    }
    

Note that the expression `InfoFeed(addr)` performs an explicit type conversion
stating that "we know that the type of the contract at the given address is
`InfoFeed`" and this does not execute a constructor. Be careful in that
`feed.info.value(10).gas(800)` only (locally) set the value and amount of gas
sent with the function call and only the parentheses at the end perform the
actual call.

Function call arguments can also be given by name, in any order:

    
    
    contract c {
    function f(uint key, uint value) { ... }
    function g() { f({value: 2, key: 3});
    }
    }
    

The names for function parameters and return parameters are optional.

    
    
    contract test { function func(uint k, uint) returns(uint){ return k; }
    }
    

## Special Variables and Functions

There are special variables and functions which always exist in the global
namespace.

### Block and Transaction Properties

  * `block.coinbase` (`address`): current block miner's address
  * `block.difficulty` (`uint`): current block difficulty
  * `block.gaslimit` (`uint`): current block gaslimit
  * `block.number` (`uint`): current block number
  * `block.blockhash` (`function(uint) returns (bytes32)`): hash of the given block
  * `block.timestamp` (`uint`): current block timestamp
  * `msg.data` (`bytes`): complete calldata
  * `msg.gas` (`uint`): remaining gas
  * `msg.sender` (`address`): sender of the message (current call)
  * `msg.value` (`uint`): number of wei sent with the message
  * `now` (`uint`): current block timestamp (alias for `block.timestamp`)
  * `tx.gasprice` (`uint`): gas price of the transaction
  * `tx.origin` (`address`): sender of the transaction (full call chain)

### Cryptographic Functions

  * `sha3(...) returns (bytes32)`: compute the SHA3 hash of the (tightly packed) arguments
  * `sha256(...) returns (bytes32)`: compute the SHA256 hash of the (tightly packed) arguments
  * `ripemd160(...) returns (bytes20)`: compute RIPEMD of 256 the (tightly packed) arguments
  * `ecrecover(bytes32, byte, bytes32, bytes32) returns (address)`: recover public key from elliptic curve signature

In the above, "tightly packed" means that the arguments are concatenated
without padding, i.e. `sha3("ab", "c") == sha3("abc") == sha3(0x616263) ==
sha3(6382179) = sha3(97, 98, 99)`. If padding is needed, explicit type
conversions can be used.

  * `this` (current contract's type): the current contract, explicitly convertible to `address`
  * `suicide(address)`: suicide the current contract, sending its funds to the given address

Furthermore, all functions of the current contract are callable directly
including the current function.

## Functions on addresses

It is possible to query the balance of an address using the property `balance`
and to send Ether (in units of wei) to an address using the `send` function:

    
    
    address x = 0x123;
    if (x.balance < 10 && address(this).balance >= 10) x.send(10);
    

Furthermore, to interface with contracts that do not adhere to the ABI (like
the classic NameReg contract), the function `call` is provided which takes an
arbitrary number of arguments of any type. These arguments are ABI-serialized
(i.e. also padded to 32 bytes). One exception is the case where the first
argument is encoded to exactly four bytes. In this case, it is not padded to
allow the use of function signatures here.

    
    
    address nameReg = 0x72ba7d8e73fe8eb666ea66babc8116a41bfb10e2;
    nameReg.call("register", "MyName");
    nameReg.call(bytes4(sha3("fun(uint256)")), a);
    

Note that contracts inherit all members of address, so it is possible to query
the balance of the current contract using `this.balance`.

## Order of Evaluation of Expressions

The evaluation order of expressions is not specified (more formally, the order
in which the children of one node in the expression tree are evaluated is not
specified, but they are of course evaluated before the node itself). It is
only guaranteed that statements are executed in order and short-circuiting for
boolean expressions is done.

## Arrays

Both variably and fixed size arrays are supported in storage and as parameters
of external functions:

    
    
    contract ArrayContract { uint[2**20] m_aLotOfIntegers; bool[2][] m_pairsOfFlags; function setAllFlagPairs(bool[2][] newPairs) { // assignment to array replaces the complete array m_pairsOfFlags = newPairs; } function setFlagPair(uint index, bool flagA, bool flagB) { // access to a non-existing index will stop execution m_pairsOfFlags[index][0] = flagA; m_pairsOfFlags[index][1] = flagB; } function changeFlagArraySize(uint newSize) { // if the new size is smaller, removed array elements will be cleared m_pairsOfFlags.length = newSize; } function clear() { // these clear the arrays completely delete m_pairsOfFlags; delete m_aLotOfIntegers; // identical effect here m_pairsOfFlags.length = 0; } bytes m_byteData; function byteArrays(bytes data) external { // byte arrays ("bytes") are different as they are stored without padding, // but can be treated identical to "uint8[]" m_byteData = data; m_byteData.length += 7; m_byteData[3] = 8; delete m_byteData[2]; }
    }
    

## Structs

Solidity provides a way to define new types in the form of structs, which is
shown in the following example:

    
    
    contract CrowdFunding { struct Funder { address addr; uint amount; } struct Campaign { address beneficiary; uint fundingGoal; uint numFunders; uint amount; mapping (uint => Funder) funders; } uint numCampaigns; mapping (uint => Campaign) campaigns; function newCampaign(address beneficiary, uint goal) returns (uint campaignID) { campaignID = numCampaigns++; // campaignID is return variable Campaign c = campaigns[campaignID]; // assigns reference c.beneficiary = beneficiary; c.fundingGoal = goal; } function contribute(uint campaignID) { Campaign c = campaigns[campaignID]; Funder f = c.funders[c.numFunders++]; f.addr = msg.sender; f.amount = msg.value; c.amount += f.amount; } function checkGoalReached(uint campaignID) returns (bool reached) { Campaign c = campaigns[campaignID]; if (c.amount < c.fundingGoal) return false; c.beneficiary.send(c.amount); c.amount = 0; return true; }
    }
    

The contract does not provide the full functionality of a crowdfunding
contract, but it contains the basic concepts necessary to understand structs.
Struct types can be used as value types for mappings and they can itself
contain mappings (even the struct itself can be the value type of the mapping,
although it is not possible to include a struct as is inside of itself). Note
how in all the functions, a struct type is assigned to a local variable. This
does not copy the struct but only store a reference so that assignments to
members of the local variable actually write to the state.

## Enums

Enums are another way to create a user-defined type in Solidity. They are
explicitly convertible to and from all integer types but implicit conversion
is not allowed. The variable of enum type can be declared as constant.

    
    
    contract test { enum ActionChoices { GoLeft, GoRight, GoStraight, SitStill } ActionChoices choices; ActionChoices constant defaultChoice = ActionChoices.GoStraight; function setGoStraight() { choices = ActionChoices.GoStraight; } function getChoice() returns (uint) { return uint(choices); } function getDefaultChoice() returns (uint) { return uint(defaultChoice); }
    }
    

## Interfacing with other Contracts

There are two ways to interface with other contracts: Either call a method of
a contract whose address is known or create a new contract. Both uses are
shown in the example below. Note that (obviously) the source code of a
contract to be created needs to be known, which means that it has to come
before the contract that creates it (and cyclic dependencies are not possible
since the bytecode of the new contract is actually contained in the bytecode
of the creating contract).

    
    
    contract OwnedToken { // TokenCreator is a contract type that is defined below. It is fine to reference it // as long as it is not used to create a new contract. TokenCreator creator; address owner; bytes32 name; function OwnedToken(bytes32 _name) { address nameReg = 0x72ba7d8e73fe8eb666ea66babc8116a41bfb10e2; nameReg.call("register", _name); owner = msg.sender; // We do an explicit type conversion from `address` to `TokenCreator` and assume that the type of // the calling contract is TokenCreator, there is no real way to check. creator = TokenCreator(msg.sender); name = _name; } function changeName(bytes32 newName) { // Only the creator can alter the name -- contracts are explicitly convertible to addresses. if (msg.sender == address(creator)) name = newName; } function transfer(address newOwner) { // Only the current owner can transfer the token. if (msg.sender != owner) return; // We also want to ask the creator if the transfer is fine. // Note that this calls a function of the contract defined below. // If the call fails (e.g. due to out-of-gas), the execution here stops // immediately (the ability to catch this will be added later). if (creator.isTokenTransferOK(owner, newOwner)) owner = newOwner; }
    }
    contract TokenCreator { function createToken(bytes32 name) returns (address tokenAddress) { // Create a new Token contract and return its address. return address(new OwnedToken(name)); } function changeName(address tokenAddress, bytes32 name) { // We need an explicit type conversion because contract types are not part of the ABI. OwnedToken token = OwnedToken(tokenAddress); token.changeName(name); } function isTokenTransferOK(address currentOwner, address newOwner) returns (bool ok) { // Check some arbitrary condition. address tokenAddress = msg.sender; return (sha3(newOwner) & 0xff) == (bytes20(tokenAddress) & 0xff); }
    }
    

## Constructor Arguments

A Solidity contract expects constructor arguments after the end of the
contract data itself. This means that you pass the arguments to a contract by
putting them after the compiled bytes as returned by the compiler in the usual
ABI format.

## Contract Inheritance

Solidity supports multiple inheritance by copying code including polymorphism.
Details are given in the following example.

    
    
    contract owned { function owned() { owner = msg.sender; } address owner;
    } // Use "is" to derive from another contract. Derived contracts can access all members
    // including private functions and storage variables.
    contract mortal is owned { function kill() { if (msg.sender == owner) suicide(owner); }
    } // These are only provided to make the interface known to the compiler.
    contract Config { function lookup(uint id) returns (address adr) {} }
    contract NameReg { function register(bytes32 name) {} function unregister() {} } // Multiple inheritance is possible. Note that "owned" is also a base class of
    // "mortal", yet there is only a single instance of "owned" (as for virtual
    // inheritance in C++).
    contract named is owned, mortal { function named(bytes32 name) { address ConfigAddress = 0xd5f9d8d94886e70b06e474c3fb14fd43e2f23970; NameReg(Config(ConfigAddress).lookup(1)).register(name); } // Functions can be overridden, both local and message-based function calls take
    // these overrides into account. function kill() { if (msg.sender == owner) { address ConfigAddress = 0xd5f9d8d94886e70b06e474c3fb14fd43e2f23970; NameReg(Config(ConfigAddress).lookup(1)).unregister();
    // It is still possible to call a specific overridden function. mortal.kill(); } }
    } // If a constructor takes an argument, it needs to be provided in the header.
    contract PriceFeed is owned, mortal, named("GoldFeed") { function updateInfo(uint newInfo) { if (msg.sender == owner) info = newInfo; } function get() constant returns(uint r) { return info; } uint info;
    }
    

Note that above, we call `mortal.kill()` to "forward" the destruction request.
The way this is done is problematic, as seen in the following example:

    
    
    contract mortal is owned { function kill() { if (msg.sender == owner) suicide(owner); }
    }
    contract Base1 is mortal { function kill() { /* do cleanup 1 */ mortal.kill(); }
    }
    contract Base2 is mortal { function kill() { /* do cleanup 2 */ mortal.kill(); }
    }
    contract Final is Base1, Base2 {
    }
    

A call to `Final.kill()` will call `Base2.kill` as the most derived override,
but this function will bypass `Base1.kill`, basically because it does not even
know about `Base1`. The way around this is to use `super`:

    
    
    contract mortal is owned { function kill() { if (msg.sender == owner) suicide(owner); }
    }
    contract Base1 is mortal { function kill() { /* do cleanup 1 */ super.kill(); }
    }
    contract Base2 is mortal { function kill() { /* do cleanup 2 */ super.kill(); }
    }
    contract Final is Base1, Base2 {
    }
    

If `Base1` calls a function of `super`, it does not simply call this function
on one of its base contracts, it rather calls this function on the next base
contract in the final inheritance graph, so it will call `Base2.kill()`. Note
that the actual function that is called when using super is not known in the
context of the class where it is used, although its type is known. This is
similar for ordinary virtual method lookup.

### Multiple Inheritance and Linearization

Languages that allow multiple inheritance have to deal with several problems,
one of them being the [Diamond Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple
_inheritance#The_diamond_problem). Solidity follows the path of Python and
uses "[C3 Linearization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C3_linearization)" to
force a specific order in the DAG of base classes. This results in the
desirable property of monotonicity but disallows some inheritance graphs.
Especially, the order in which the base classes are given in the `is`
directive is important. In the following code, Solidity will give the error
"Linearization of inheritance graph impossible".

    
    
    contract X {}
    contract A is X {}
    contract C is A, X {}
    

The reason for this is that `C` requests `X` to override `A` (by specifying
`A, X` in this order), but `A` itself requests to override `X`, which is a
contradiction that cannot be resolved.

A simple rule to remember is to specify the base classes in the order from
"most base-like" to "most derived".

## Abstract Contracts

Contract functions can lack an implementation as in the following example
(note that the function declaration header is terminated by `;`).

    
    
    contract feline { function utterance() returns (bytes32);
    }
    

Such contracts cannot be compiled (even if they contain implemented functions
alongside non-implemented functions), but they can be used as base contracts:

    
    
    contract Cat is feline { function utterance() returns (bytes32) { return "miaow"; }
    }
    

If a contract inherits from an abstract contract and does not implement all
non-implemented functions by overriding, it will itself be abstract.

## Visibility Specifiers

Functions and storage variables can be specified as being `public`, `internal`
or `private`, where the default for functions is `public` and `internal` for
storage variables. In addition, functions can also be specified as `external`.

External: External functions are part of the contract interface and they can
be called from other contracts and via transactions. An external function `f`
cannot be called internally (i.e. `f()` does not work, but `this.f()` works).
Furthermore, all function parameters are immutable.

Public: Public functions are part of the contract interface and can be either
called internally or via messages. For public storage variables, an automatic
accessor function (see below) is generated.

Inherited: Those functions and storage variables can only be accessed
internally.

Private: Private functions and storage variables are only visible for the
contract they are defined in and not in derived contracts.

    
    
    contract c { function f(uint a) private returns (uint b) { return a + 1; } function setData(uint a) inherited { data = a; } uint public data;
    }
    

Other contracts can call `c.data()` to retrieve the value of data in storage,
but are not able to call `f`. Contracts derived from `c` can call `setData` to
alter the value of `data` (but only in their own storage).

## Accessor Functions

The compiler automatically creates accessor functions for all public state
variables. The contract given below will have a function called `data` that
does not take any arguments and returns a uint, the value of the state
variable `data`. The initialization of state variables can be done at
declaration.

    
    
    contract test { uint public data = 42;
    }
    

The next example is a bit more complex:

    
    
    contract complex { struct Data { uint a; bytes3 b; mapping(uint => uint) map; } mapping(uint => mapping(bool => Data[])) public data;
    }
    

It will generate a function of the following form:

    
    
    function data(uint arg1, bool arg2, uint arg3) returns (uint a, bytes3 b)
    { a = data[arg1][arg2][arg3].a; b = data[arg1][arg2][arg3].b;
    }
    

Note that the mapping in the struct is omitted because there is no good way to
provide the key for the mapping.

## Fallback Functions

A contract can have exactly one unnamed function. This function cannot have
arguments and is executed on a call to the contract if none of the other
functions matches the given function identifier (or if no data was supplied at
all).

    
    
    contract Test { function() { x = 1; } uint x;
    } contract Caller { function callTest(address testAddress) { Test(testAddress).send(0); // results in Test(testAddress).x becoming == 1. }
    }
    

## Function Modifiers

Modifiers can be used to easily change the behaviour of functions, for example
to automatically check a condition prior to executing the function. They are
inheritable properties of contracts and may be overridden by derived
contracts.

    
    
    contract owned { function owned() { owner = msg.sender; } address owner; // This contract only defines a modifier but does not use it - it will // be used in derived contracts. // The function body is inserted where the special symbol "_" in the // definition of a modifier appears. modifier onlyowner { if (msg.sender == owner) _ }
    }
    contract mortal is owned { // This contract inherits the "onlyowner"-modifier from "owned" and // applies it to the "kill"-function, which causes that calls to "kill" // only have an effect if they are made by the stored owner. function kill() onlyowner { suicide(owner); }
    }
    contract priced { // Modifiers can receive arguments: modifier costs(uint price) { if (msg.value >= price) _ }
    }
    contract Register is priced, owned { mapping (address => bool) registeredAddresses; uint price; function Register(uint initialPrice) { price = initialPrice; } function register() costs(price) { registeredAddresses[msg.sender] = true; } function changePrice(uint _price) onlyowner { price = _price; }
    }
    

Multiple modifiers can be applied to a function by specifying them in a
whitespace-separated list and will be evaluated in order. Explicit returns
from a modifier or function body immediately leave the whole function, while
control flow reaching the end of a function or modifier body continues after
the "_" in the preceding modifier. Arbitrary expressions are allowed for
modifier arguments and in this context, all symbols visible from the function
are visible in the modifier. Symbols introduced in the modifier are not
visible in the function (as they might change by overriding).

## Events

Events allow the convenient usage of the EVM logging facilities. Events are
inheritable members of contracts. When they are called, they cause the
arguments to be stored in the transaction's log. Up to three parameters can
receive the attribute `indexed` which will cause the respective arguments to
be treated as log topics instead of data. The hash of the signature of the
event is one of the topics except you declared the event with `anonymous`
specifier. All non-indexed arguments will be stored in the data part of the
log. Example:

    
    
    contract ClientReceipt { event Deposit(address indexed _from, bytes32 indexed _id, uint _value); function deposit(bytes32 _id) { Deposit(msg.sender, _id, msg.value); }
    }
    

Here, the call to `Deposit` will behave identical to `log3(msg.value,
0x50cb9fe53daa9737b786ab3646f04d0150dc50ef4e75f59509d83667ad5adb20,
sha3(msg.sender), _id);`. Note that the large hex number is equal to the
sha3-hash of "Deposit(address,bytes32,uint256)", the event's signature.

## Layout of Storage

Statically-sized variables (everything except mapping and dynamically-sized
array types) are laid out contiguously in storage starting from position `0`.
Multiple items that need less than 32 bytes are packed into a single storage
slot if possible, according to the following rules:

  * The first item in a storage slot is stored lower-order aligned.
  * Elementary types use only that many bytes that are necessary to store them.
  * If an elementary type does not fit the remaining part of a storage slot, it is moved to the next storage slot.
  * Structs and array data always start a new slot and occupy whole slots (but items inside a struct or array are packed tightly according to these rules).

The elements of structs and arrays are stored after each other, just as if
they were given explicitly.

Due to their unpredictable size, mapping and dynamically-sized array types use
a `sha3` computation to find the starting position of the value or the array
data. These starting positions are always full stack slots.

The mapping or the dynamic array itself occupies an (unfilled) slot in storage
at some position `p` according to the above rule (or by recursively applying
this rule for mappings to mappings or arrays of arrays). For a dynamic array,
this slot stores the number of elements in the array. For a mapping, the slot
is unused (but it is needed so that two equal mappings after each other will
use a different hash distribution). Array data is located at `sha3(p)` and the
value corresponding to a mapping key `k` is located at `sha3(k . p)` where `.`
is concatenation. If the value is again a non-elementary type, the positions
are found by adding an offset of `sha3(k . p)`.

So for the following contract snippet:

    
    
    contract c { struct S { uint a; uint b; } uint x; mapping(uint => mapping(uint => S)) data;
    }
    

The position of `data[4][9].b` is at `sha3(uint256(9) . sha3(uint256(4) .
uint(256(1))) + 1`.

## Esoteric Features

There are some types in Solidity's type system that have no counterpart in the
syntax. One of these types are the types of functions. But still, using `var`
it is possible to have local variables of these types:

    
    
    contract FunctionSelector { function select(bool useB, uint x) returns (uint z) { var f = a; if (useB) f = b; return f(x); } function a(uint x) returns (uint z) { return x * x; } function b(uint x) returns (uint z) { return 2 * x; }
    }
    

Calling `select(false, x)` will compute `x * x` and `select(true, x)` will
compute `2 * x`.

## Internals - the Optimizer

The Solidity optimizer operates on assembly, so it can be and also is used by
other languages. It splits the sequence of instructions into basic blocks at
points that are hard to move. These are basically all instructions that modify
change the control flow (jumps, calls, etc), instructions that have side
effects apart from `MSTORE` and `SSTORE` (like `LOGi`, `EXTCODECOPY`, but also
`CALLDATALOAD` and others). Inside of such a block, the instructions are
analysed and every modification to the stack, to memory or storage is recorded
as an expression which consists of an instruction and a list of arguments
which are essentially pointers to other expressions. The main idea is now to
find expressions that are always equal (or every input) and combine them into
an expression class. The optimizer first tries to find each new expression in
a list of already known expressions. If this does not work, the expression is
simplified according to rules like `constant` \+ `constant` =
`sum_of_constants` or `X` * 1 = `X`. Since this is done recursively, we can
also apply the latter rule if the second factor is a more complex expression
where we know that it will always evaluate to one. Modifications to storage
and memory locations have to erase knowledge about storage and memory
locations which are not known to be different: If we first write to location x
and then to location y and both are input variables, the second could
overwrite the first, so we actually do not know what is stored at x after we
wrote to y. On the other hand, if a simplification of the expression x - y
evaluates to a non-zero constant, we know that we can keep our knowledge about
what is stored at x.

At the end of this process, we know which expressions have to be on the stack
in the end and have list of modifications to memory and storage. From these
expressions which are actually needed, a dependency graph is created and every
operation that is not part of this graph is essentially dropped. Now new code
is generated that applies the modifications to memory and storage in the order
they were made in the original code (dropping modifications which were found
not to be needed) and finally, generates all values that are required to be on
the stack in the correct place.

These steps are applied to each basic block and the newly generated code is
used as replacement if it is smaller. If a basic block is split at a JUMPI and
during the analysis, the condition evaluates to a constant, the JUMPI is
replaced depending on the value of the constant, and thus code like

    
    
    var x = 7;
    data[7] = 9;
    if (data[x] != x + 2) return 2;
    else return 1;
    

is simplified to code which can also be compiled from

    
    
    data[7] = 9;
    return 1;
    

even though the instructions contained a jump in the beginning.
